# Senior Design Design Report

## Team Members
- Dillon Troxell
  troxeldj@mail.uc.edu

## Project Description
A compiler for a custom programming language. This programming language will support constructs such as variables, functions, and classes. 

The compiler will compile down to x86/x64 assembly and will allow the user to execute their programs on their target machine.

The compiler is composed of these components:
- Lexical Analyzer (Lexer): Takes in source code (custom langage) and returns a list of tokens
- Parser: Takes in list of tokens and returns an AST
- Generator: Takes in our AST and generates ASM code

## User Stories and Design Diagrams

### User Stories
1. As a user, I want my source code to compile into x86/x64 assembly so that I can link,
load, and execute my code.

This is a broad requirement. The goal of this compiler is to take source code in our
language and produce something that can be ran on a machine.

2. As a user, I want the compiler to generate detailed error messages so that I can easily
debug issues with my code.

This requirement pertains to error messages raised throughout the stages in the
compiler. The compiler should be able to tell the user where the error was so that they
can easier locate the error in their code and make the appropriate fix.

3. As a developer, I want the the compiler to handle variable declarations so that users
can perform operations on variable data.

This requirement will allow users to create variables of a specified type. This is an
important feature of any language.

### Design Diagrams
#### Design Diagram 1: Basic Compiler Function

[Image showing Compiler Functions](https://github.com/troxeldj/senior-compiler/blob/master/design-diagrams/design-1.png?raw=true)

The first diagram is simple, but it's important to understand exactly what a compiler does. A
compiler is defined as a program that takes in code in a "source" language (often called
source code), and generates code in another (target) language.
This simple succinctly diagram defines this operation. The next diagrams will get deeper
into how exactly this translation occurs

#### Design Diagram 2: Compiler Stages

[Image showing compiler stages](https://github.com/troxeldj/senior-compiler/blob/master/design-diagrams/design-2.png?raw=true)

Lexical Analysis: Here we scan through characters, group them and output Tokens. A
token is a data structure that contains a value and a type (see diagram 3 for more
detail).
Input: text (file contents)
Output: A list of tokens

Syntax Analysis: Here we work with the tokens output by the lexer. We define a
grammar and can build a parser to parse tokens according to our grammar (the
starting grammar is defined below)
Input: List of Tokens
Output: AST (Abstract Syntax Tree)
Note: Our language will use a "Recursive Descent Parser"

Intermediate Code Generation (optional): During the transition from source code to
target code, a compiler might generate a variety of intermediate representations of our
program before eventually getting to our target code.
Input: AST (Abstract Syntax Tree) or Another Intermediate Representation of our
AST
Output: Intermediate representation of our program

Code Generation: Here is where we use our Abstract Syntax Tree or intermediate
representation to generate code in our target language
Input: AST or intermediate representation of our program
Output: Code in our target language

#### Design Diagram 3: UML Diagram
[Image showing UML Diagram](https://github.com/troxeldj/senior-compiler/blob/master/design-diagrams/design-3.png)

This more-in-depth design goes into the system at a component level. We define classes
used by the various stages

Compiler Components:
- Lexer: The lexer will take in source code, group characters into "lexemes" and make
tokens out of these lexemes and a token type.
- Parser: The parser will take the list of tokens from the lexer, fit them to a grammar
(starting grammar provided - will expand as project goes on).
- Generator: The generator will take the AST generated by the parser, run the
generateProgram method that will traverse this tree, and generate code for the
elements in the tree. The generator will produce assembly code that we can then link, load, and execute on our machine.

Other Classes:
- TokenType (enum): This enum will hold all the token types for the language. The
token has a token type that allows the developer to differentiate between tokens based on their type.
- Token: This class will be used in the lexer to generate a list of tokens based on input
text. It will also be used by the parser to tell what operations are occuring (example: <number> <operator> <number> is a binary operation).
- Expr: Base class for expressions. This abstract class will serve as a base class for other expression types (such as BinaryExpr, UnaryExpr, Literal)

## Project Tasks and Timeline
### Task List

A typical compiler operates in stages, a compiler can have a multitude of different stages. However, for my project there will be four distinct stages:
1. Lexical Analysis
2. Parsing
3. Intermediate code Generation
4. Assembly (x86/x64) Code Generation


#### Lexical Analysis Tasks
1. Research Lexical Analysis and what the purpose of lexical analysis is within a compiler
2. Research implementations of Lexical Analysis Components (Lexers) in current language compilers; such as CPython
3. Develop the lexical analysis component (lexer) of the compiler
4. Test and QA the lexical analysis component(s) of the compiler

#### Parsing Tasks
5. Research Parsing and what the purpose of parsing is within a compiler
6. Research the various types of parsing (recursive descent, top-down, bottom-up, etc.) to find the best fit for the project
7. Research Implementations of Parsing Components (Parsers) in current language compilers; such as CPython
8. Develop the parsing component of the compiler
9. Test and QA the parsing component(s) for the compiler

#### Code Generation Tasks
9. Research Intermediate code generation and common formats compilers use to generate intermediate forms (things such as three-address-code (TACS/3AC)).
10. Research intermediate code generation implementations in current language compilers; such as CPython
11. Develop the intermediate code generation component for the project's compiler
12. Research Assembly Code Generation implementations and how this process works in current compiler implementations; such as CPython
13. Develop the code generation component for the project's compiler

#### Final QA Tasks
14. QA the compiler as a whole. Ensure the interaction between components is functioning and the compiler generates correct assembly code.

Note: I (Dillon Troxell) am the only member of my team (Mightnight squad), so all tasks will be assigned to me.

### Milestone List
1. Basic Lexer Created: Creation of a basic lexer that can lex: identifiers, strings, int,
float, numbers, parenthesis, and mathematical operators

2. Basic Parser Created: Creation of a parser that can parse Binary Expressions, Unary
Expressions, Literals, and Variable Declarations

3. Basic Interpreter Created: Creation of a basic interpreter that walks the AST created by the parser and prints output of expressions

4. Basic Generator Created: Creation of a basic generator that walks the AST created by the parser and generates assembly code for the application. 
Includes research around theory and implementation.

5. Add Function Support: Add the ability for the user to create user-defined functions
within scripts.
- Includes research around theory and implementation
- Would require alterations to lexer, parser, and generator

6. Add Class Support: Add the ability for the user to create user-defined classes within
scripts
- Includes research around theory and implementation
- Would require alterations to lexer, parser, and generator

7. Whole Project QA and Refactor: QA of the whole project, refactors/changes made to:
Lexer, Parser, Generator, Interpreter (if needed)
- Includes Testing every part of compiler, writing test cases, and refactoring compiler
logic where needed

### Effort Matrix

| Milestone | Start Date | End Date |
| --------- | ---------- | -------- |
| Basic Lexer | 9/1/24 | Completed |
| Basic Parser | 9/1/24 | Completed |
| Basic Interpreter | 9/1/24 | Completed |
| Basic Generator | 10/7/24 | 12/1/24 |
| Function Support Added | 12/1/24 | 1/1/24 |
| Class Support Added | 1/1/24 | 2/1/24 |
| Whole Project QA and Refactor | 2/1/24 | 4/1/24 |

## ABET Concerns Essay

There are many constraints that need to be considered when developing a software
project. Ensuring your software best fits your target audience, and ensuring it's
maintainable are just two things vital to the success of a software product. Our product, a
programming language compiler, also has some constraints pertaining to the way you
design the system. In this short essay, we discuss potential ethical, legal, and security
constraints that come with designing a compiler.

We strive for the compiler to be in good ethical standards. It's important that we keep all
user input, and potentially user information private and secure. It's also important to ensure
that our compiler is easy to use and is accessible to the greatest number of people.
Through clear exception handling and error messages, we can ensure these ethical
properties are met.

Legal constraints are an often overlooked area. There's a lot of great tooling that comes
with compiler development. We need to ensure we responsibly use open-source software
and abide by the license that accompanies this code. If we later introduce usage analytics,
we also need to ensure this user information is kept confidential between the user and the
system. Abiding by these legal constraints will assist in making our compiler much more
secure and in good standing from a legal standpoint.
One last area of consideration is security. This ties closely into the constraints we
mentioned in the previous two areas. One important thing to consider is malicious user
input. Our compiler should be able to handle malicious input and handle this input in a
predictable manner. One other consideration is memory safety. The compiler is written in
C++, so it's important we take advantage of modern C++ features such as smart pointers
to ensure memory safety in our product and prevent exploitation (such as buffer overflow,
etc).

## PPT Slideshow

[Powerpoint Slideshow Link]()

## Self-Assessment Essay

For my senior project, I will be developing a compiler. Compilers are very interesting pieces of
technology that take source code of one format and compile them into a binary that can actually
be ran on a machine. During the transition from source code to the target code, the compiler
may generate many intermediate forms. Compilers for languages such as C or Go can get
pretty complex! Compiler design is an area of software engineering that I do not have much
experience in. However, learning how to write things such as parsers can be helpful in other
areas as well. I personally, thought this project was good to expand my horizons and work on
something that I haven't seen before.

Thus far in my compute science degree, I have taken many classes with material relevant to
compiler development. One course that comes to mind is EECE4029 or "Operating Systems
and Systems Programming". Compilers rely heavily on OS features and knowing how they work
is imperative to building a good compiler. Another noteworthy class that comes to mind is
CS4071 or "Design and Analysis of Algorithms". This class' material will come in handy all
throughout the the compiler and in areas such as building an abstract syntax tree. Some other
helpful classes include EECE3093C - Software Engineering (For keeping organized and
learning OOP concepts), CS4065 - Computer Networks and Networked Computing (For
working with low-level networking libraries and how networking works), and CS3003 -
Programming Languages (For understanding how programming languages function). These
classes are fundamental to a lot of projects that you start and I feel a lot better knowing that I
have all this knowledge in my toolbelt.

Complimenting what I have learned in the class room, I have five semesters of co-op
experience. My first few co-op semesters I worked as an IT Technician for Metalex
Manufacturing in Blue Ash, OH. Here I learned a lot about Windows Server, Authentication
servers, Server hardware assembly, and writing scripts within PowerShell. I also picked up on a
lot of soft skills within this such as teamwork, communication, time management, and others. I
also worked (and still do) as a Data Engineering co-op for 84.51 (Kroger's Data Science wing).
Here I learned how to build production data pipelines. I used technologies such as: Databricks,
Snowflake, Python, SQL, MySQL, PostreSQL, GitHub, Bash, and others. This co-op in
particular showed me what production code looks like and how to use technologies such as
GitHub at a massive scale. I picked up and refined my soft skills here as well.

I am excited about this project because compiler design and development is an area that is new
to me. I really enjoy just digging into something and think this project was a good idea to do just
that. I am planning on researching what compilers are, how they work, the components that
make up a compiler. After gathering information I will structure diagrams to map out exactly how
the implementation is going to look like. I believe that having a strong foundation will make the
actual implementation easier later on. Being that I am working on this individually, time
management will be the key to success.

The actual implementation of the compiler will all be done in C++. I am planning on having this
compiler generate assembly code (either x86 or x64). I expect that this compiler will be able to
take in the source code for my custom language and output an executable that can be loaded
into system memory and executed on a machine. I am planning on making a roadmap with
dates and stages of development that I will try my best to stick to. With this structured
approach, I know that if I meet these goals and keep up with the pre-planned steps, I have done
what is required and that the development is on track. I am super excited to begin this project
and believe that I will come out of it a more well-rounded computer scientist.

## Professional Biography

[Professional Biography Link](https://github.com/troxeldj/senior-compiler/blob/master/personal-biography.md)

## Budget

There haven't been any expenses for this project. This has all been local development by the team (just me, Dillon Troxell).

There have also been no donations offered or accepted for this project

## Appendix

### External Resources
[Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools](https://www.amazon.com/Compilers-Principles-Techniques-Tools-2nd/dp/0321486811)

[Crafting Interpreters](https://craftinginterpreters.com/scanning.html)

### My Resources
[My CPP Implementation of Crafting Interpreters](https://github.com/troxeldj/cppLox)

[My Python Implementation of Crafting Interpreters](https://github.com/troxeldj/lox-interpreter)

[Notes](https://github.com/troxeldj/senior-compiler/notes)

[This Repository](https://github.com/troxeldj/senior-compiler)
